JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight, we
examine the
campaign environment this
election year for
paid campaign ads. Are they the
most reliable
way to get a message out?
Then, a Chicago task force finds
systematic
racism in its police department
and calls
for sweeping changes.
And a new approach to financial
advice, putting
it on one index card?
HAROLD POLLACK, University of
Chicago: All
the financial experts actually
had a pretty
simple set of things that they
suggested that
you do, and basically all of
them would say
tune out all the other stuff.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Democratic
presidential
contenders face another showdown
moment tonight.
Hillary Clinton and Bernie
Sanders debate
in Brooklyn, just five days
before the New
York state primary.
Meanwhile, Donald Trump's
campaign manager,
Corey Lewandowski, will not be
prosecuted
for grabbing the arm of a woman
reporter.
A state attorney in Palm Beach,
Florida, said
today that there's not enough
evidence to
make a case of misdemeanor
battery.
In the day's other news: The
U.S. military
announced new moves in the South
China Sea,
in response to a Chinese
buildup. Defense
Secretary Ash Carter said joint
patrols with
the Philippines Navy are already
under way.
In Manila for war games with the
Philippines
military, he said the goal is
not to be provocative,
but to tamp down tensions.
ASHTON CARTER, U.S. Defense
Secretary: Our
efforts to do more together
demonstrate America's
unbreakable commitment to the
defense of this
nation, the security and
stability of the
Asia Pacific, and the principles
that have
helped so many in the region to
rise and prosper.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S. also
plans to rotate
more troops and warplanes
through the Philippines.
China criticized the moves as a
challenge
to its sovereignty and security.
On the trade front, China's
government has
agreed to scrap some of the
subsidies it gives
to companies that export goods.
The U.S. Trade
Representative's Office said
today that Beijing's
decision affects specialty
steel, agriculture,
textiles, and other sectors.
Washington says
the subsidies let China flood
the market with
cheaply priced goods.
Russian President Vladimir Putin
sought to
ease his country's economic
jitters today
in his annual televised call-in
show. Putin
took a number of questions from
Russian citizens
that ranged from worries about
stagnant growth
to food shortages.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through
translator): I hope and I am
almost sure that
this is a temporary situation
and that step
by step, along with markets
being filled with
locally produced foodstuff,
prices will be
going down as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Putin also warned
the U.S.
to abandon what he called
imperial ambitions
and to respect Russian
interests.
Rescue workers in Southern Japan
searched
into the night for survivors
after an earthquake
toppled homes and killed at
least two people.
News footage showed a TV
station's offices
shaking violently on the island
of Kyushu.
Elsewhere, firefighters battled
blazes set
off by building collapses.
There were new protests in
Nigeria today over
the fate of the so-called Chibok
schoolgirls.
More than 200 were kidnapped by
Boko Haram
militants two years ago today,
prompting a
worldwide campaign for their
release.
Now CNN has aired apparently
recent video
of 15 of the girls.
And Jonathan Rugman of
Independent Television
News reports on the reaction.
JONATHAN RUGMAN: Boko Haram last
filmed about
half the group a month into
their kidnapping.
A rescue seemed possible after
British and
American aerial intelligence
spotted a group
in the forest, but it was judged
too dangerous
for the hostages.
Boko Haram's commander demanded
his fellow
fighters' release from prison in
exchange
for the girls. Two years on, a
few of the
Chibok families and their
supporters marched
in the capital, Abuja, still
demanding answers
from a government which claims
negotiations
are ongoing, but which has told
them almost
nothing.
Parents stunned by the release
to the media
of new pictures, yet no release
of the children
themselves, this the reaction of
one mother
after recognizing her daughter's
school friends,
though her own daughter had not
appeared.
Though much of the world has
moved on, in
the refugee camps of
Northeastern Nigeria,
they cannot. Boko Haram roughly
translates
as "Western education is
forbidden." While
millions have fled its would-be
caliphate,
it has killed over 600 teachers
and abducted
around 2,000 girls and boys.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The fate of most
of the Chibok
girls remains a mystery.
Back in this country, Microsoft
is suing the
federal government over a law
that lets investigators
look at customer e-mails and
files without
telling the customer. The
company says it
happened 5,600 times in 18
months.
And on Wall Street, the Dow
Jones industrial
average gained 18 points to
close at 17926.
The Nasdaq fell a point, and the
S&P 500 added
a fraction.
And on the South Lawn of the
White House today,
President Obama and Vice
President Biden welcomed
hundreds of cyclists from the
Wounded Warrior
Project. The annual event is in
its ninth
year. Today's participants rode
a lap around
the grounds of the White House
before heading
out into Washington. The ride
aims to raise
awareness of wounded veterans
and their abilities.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
how the 2016
presidential race is also
breaking the rules
of political advertising;
Chicago finds its
police force guilty of
systematic racism;
financial advice simplified to
fit on one
index card; and much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
FDA approves
an additive in corn flour to
help protect
women from birth defects; a bill
to legalize
physician-assisted suicide is
introduced in
Canada; and screenwriter and
actor Danny Strong
on why writing should be based
on passion,
not experience.
Now we turn to politics and our
series looking
at how this election differs
from years past.
Tonight, we focus on the change
in advertising,
how candidates are communicating
with voters,
both in paid and free media.
There's nothing quite like the
candidates
meeting directly with voters,
but paid political
ads on TV long ago became the
way to reach
more people than the candidates
themselves
ever could in person.
The firm Kantar Media CMAG keeps
track of
ads, and it reports total
spending on spots
for and about the candidates has
topped $380
million so far this election
season. That
figure includes not just
spending on ads by
the candidates, but also that by
outside supportive
groups, so-called super PACs.
Ironically, two candidates who
dropped out,
Republicans Jeb Bush and Marco
Rubio, account
for about one-third of this
season's total,
while Democrats Bernie Sanders
and Hillary
Clinton have benefited from $100
million in
ad spending together.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
I spent peanuts, and I'm by far
number one.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But the most
telling number
may be $17 million. That's all
that Donald
Trump has spent as he's sat
astride the front-runner
position in the GOP. Instead,
Trump has relied
mainly on what's called free
media: news coverage
and social media like Twitter.
All of the candidates use
Twitter, but Trump
has made strategic use of tweets
to get his
message out. He has more than
seven million
followers. Hillary Clinton has
nearly six
million.
There's also the extensive
exposure candidates
are getting from news coverage,
prime-time
TV debates, and nationally
televised town
halls. This evening, for
instance, Ted Cruz
and John Kasich will appear in
town halls
in New York, and Clinton and
Sanders debate
in Brooklyn.
For more on how paid and free
media are shaping
the presidential race, we're
joined now by
Elizabeth Wilner, the senior
vice president
for political advertising at
Kantar Media.
And Ken Goldstein, he's
political science
professor at the University of
San Francisco.
And we welcome both of you to
the "NewsHour."
KEN GOLDSTEIN, University of San
Francisco:
Thank you.
ELIZABETH WILNER, Senior Vice
President for
Political Advertising, Kantar
Media: Thank
you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, to listen to
those numbers
that we just heard, Elizabeth
Wilner, you
would think that paid
advertising has not
had the impact in this election
cycle that
it has in the past.
How do you see it?
ELIZABETH WILNER: Well, Donald
Trump has changed
the dynamic.
Historically, paid advertising
and the ability
of candidates to raise enormous
sums of money,
that has helped to distinguish
the front-runner,
right, who has the most money to
spend on
TV. In this case, the candidate
who has spent
the least amount of money on TV
and put the
least effort into his TV
advertising is the
front-runner on the Republican
side.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you see
it, Ken?
KEN GOLDSTEIN: Well, as
Elizabeth pointed
out, usually, the rule in
politics is follow
the money.
But if you followed the money
here, you would
get to Right to Rise that spent
$75 million
on behalf of Jeb Bush, and who
is not in the
race anymore, or Conservative
Solutions Project,
who spent $50 million on behalf
of Marco Rubio.
So, overall, it suggests it may
not be having
an impact, but what we did see
in Wisconsin
was a focused advertising
effort.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Wisconsin
primary a couple
weeks ago.
KEN GOLDSTEIN: The Wisconsin
primary a couple
weeks ago.
A focused advertising effort,
along with some
other things, still can move
numbers.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But when you look
at that,
Elizabeth Wilner, and you look
at the money
that was spent earlier by --
even by the candidates
who are no longer in the race,
what did you
learn from that this year?
ELIZABETH WILNER: Well, we
learned that voters
are looking for something that
they clearly
didn't see in the array of
candidates who
were out there early spending
money on TV.
There were a number of
candidates spending
a lot of money in Iowa. None of
them -- you
know, they all dropped out early
on. The candidates
who were spending most money
wound up having
to drop out in February or
March.
What we saw was voters looking
for something
that they just weren't getting
from the usual
slate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And is it, Ken
Goldstein, that
the messages weren't working?
I mean, I'm not asking you to
analyze what
voters saw in every one of these
spots, but
was there something quantitative
-- qualitatively
different this year about what
these candidates
were saying in their ads?
KEN GOLDSTEIN: I think we're all
guilty -- and
I'm probably the most guilty --
of falling
into the trap of counting the
bombs, looking
at the targeting, how much --
how many ads,
how much money was spent.
And we forget the message
matters. And so,
yes, how much money you spend
matters, how
many ads you air matters. If you
target it
smart, that matters. But, at the
end of the
day, if the message isn't
compelling, the
effect of that ad is still going
to be zero.
And I think that's what we saw
in lot of these
early primaries, where, as
Elizabeth said,
the message, even if brilliantly
targeted
and lots of money behind it, was
either not
crafted correctly or that's just
not what
the voters wanted to buy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It does look
like, Elizabeth
Wilner, that some of the -- at
least on the
Democratic side, some of the
spots that Hillary
Clinton and Bernie Sanders were
using earlier,
they're still using.
ELIZABETH WILNER: Yes, they are
repeating
some of the same spots over and
over again
as they go from state to state.
Clearly, they
have some favorites that they
feel are particularly
effective.
The ad narrated by Morgan
Freeman for Hillary
Clinton gets played over and
over again. And
on Bernie Sanders' behalf, the
America ad
also gets played over and over
again.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do they
measure what is
effective?
ELIZABETH WILNER: I assume they
are focus-grouping.
And I assume they are
poll-testing and trying
to determine which ads work.
In Sanders' case, the America ad
got a lot
of social media pickup, so they
determined
that that was an effective ad.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ken Goldstein, we
of course
also mentioned -- we're talking
about how
much Donald Trump has used
so-called free
media.
Is there a way to quantify the
value of that?
I mean, when you think about the
town hall
meetings that these candidates
have done,
the debates, is there a way to
look at the
value of that vs. the value of
paid advertising?
KEN GOLDSTEIN: Very difficult.
We clearly know it's more than
the $18 million
that he's actually spent. But
it's calling
into news shows and calling into
local news
shows and national news shows
and cable news
shows. So, it's absolutely in
the hundreds
of millions of dollars, because,
listen, one
of the main reasons why you use
paid advertising
is, if you folks in the media
aren't talking
about it, you have to get an ad
to get the
-- to generate some media
conversation.
Well, Donald Trump doesn't seem
to need that
to generate conversation and to
generate people
talking about him and his ideas.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All he has to do
is tweet.
ELIZABETH WILNER: All he has to
do is tweet
once.
He probably gets more value out
of one tweet
than many of the candidates have
gotten out
of an ad this cycle.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we looked at
-- I think
he's done more than 35,000 or
36,000 tweets,
and maybe most of them in this
cycle.
How do you see the difference,
though, between
paid and free? Can you quantify
the value
of free media vs. news coverage
and social
media vs. paid ads?
ELIZABETH WILNER: Well, it's
really difficult,
as Ken said, to quantify the
value of it.
When you're doing paid media, at
least you're
controlling the message that is
coming out.
So if you want all of your spots
to be positive,
they will all be positive. If
you want to
spend some of your money on
negative attacks,
you can do that.
With earned media or free media,
it's a mix.
It is what you get. And Trump
coasted on some
fairly positive media for a long
time. More
recently, and in Wisconsin, he
was having
to deal with more negative
media.
And in the last few weeks, the
coverage of
him has been more mixed and more
negative.
What's interesting is, he hasn't
felt a need
to spend any more on TV because
of that, but
he may down the road need to
start doing that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What...
(CROSSTALK)
KEN GOLDSTEIN: I'm sorry.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Go ahead, Ken,
yes.
KEN GOLDSTEIN: Focusing on my
old home state
of Wisconsin, I think that's an
example of
when it works. So it's not just
paid media.
It's not just earned media. But,
in Wisconsin,
what you had was free media,
which was conservative
talk radio, anti-Trump.
On top of that, you had paid
advertising.
And on top of that, you had
candidates and
their surrogates focused. So,
when advertising
works, it's often not a silver
bullet, but
it's when you have that echo
chamber of messages.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what do you
say, Ken Goldstein,
to people who say, well, it
looks like paid
advertising doesn't work
anymore? What do
you say?
KEN GOLDSTEIN: It depends what
you mean by
matter, right?
Listen, there's big fundamental
factors that
are obviously moving this
election that are
going to move the general
election. But if
this race gets into field goal
range or 1
or 2 or 3 percentage points,
then focused
television advertising can
matter at the margin.
If this ends up being a 10
percent or 15 percentage
point race, no, it's not going
to matter.
But, interestingly, folks might
be worried
about, oh, there's not going to
be any advertisings
in the presidential race,
because maybe it
is going to be less competitive
than we think.
But what is going to happen is,
you are going
to have more House races
competitive and more
Senate races are competitive,
and that money
is going to have to go
somewhere. And it's
going to go on the air in those
local races.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes.
And we have to remember, it's
not just the
presidential.
But, Elizabeth Wilner, finally,
if somebody
says to you, paid advertising is
history,
what do you say?
ELIZABETH WILNER: Oh, well, I
can't laugh
right now, but I would laugh.
(LAUGHTER)
ELIZABETH WILNER: It's always
effective at
the margins, as Ken has said.
And in a close
race, it really does make a
difference if
it's done well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Because people
who don't see
Twitter and don't see the news
media are going
to be seeing other television
and radio where
these paid spots will be.
ELIZABETH WILNER: That's right.
And there will be a number -- a
good portion
of people in a close race at the
end of the
day who are not online looking
for information,
who are not following tweets,
who are not
necessarily watching the news,
but they might
be watching a baseball game or a
hockey game,
and they will see an ad, and
that might help
change their mind or make up
their mind.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's what makes
it all so
hard to predict.
ELIZABETH WILNER: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Elizabeth Wilner,
Ken Goldstein,
we thank you.
KEN GOLDSTEIN: Thank you.
ELIZABETH WILNER: Thanks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next: a stinging
report on
police tactics in a city where
civic tensions
have been running high.
John Yang has our story.
JOHN YANG: Chicago has seen
months of outcry
aimed at the nation's third
largest police
force. Just this week,
demonstrators marched
after the latest fatal shooting
of a black
teenager.
Now, after a four-month review,
a police accountability
task force has delivered a
damning assessment.
LORI LIGHTFOOT, Chicago Task
Force on Police
Accountability: Many people said
that they
believe that the police that
they encountered
were fundamentally racist.
JOHN YANG: The report says the
police department's
own data gives validity to "the
widely held
belief the police have no regard
for the sanctity
of life when it comes to people
of color."
Exhibit A, 74 percent of those
shot by police
in recent years were
African-American, even
though blacks make up just a
third of the
city's population. It all came
to a head last
fall, when police dash-cam video
showed a
white officer killing black
teenager Laquan
McDonald in 2014.
Facing a firestorm, Mayor Rahm
Emanuel created
the task force, and sacked the
police superintendent.
RAHM EMANUEL (D), Mayor of
Chicago: Congratulations.
EDDIE JOHNSON, Chicago Police
Superintendent:
Thank you, sir.
(APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: Yesterday, the city
council unanimously
approved Chicago police veteran
Eddie Johnson
as the new superintendent.
EDDIE JOHNSON: I promise the
citizens of Chicago,
the elected officials and the
rank-and-file
police officers I will do my
best, my absolute
best, to regain the trust and to
resolve some
of this violence that we have
out here.
JOHN YANG: Both Johnson and
Emanuel say they're
now reviewing the task force's
recommendations.
We're joined from Chicago by
Lori Lightfoot,
who headed the task force that
issued that
report. She's a former federal
prosecutor
and now the president of the
Chicago Police
Board, an independent oversight
agency.
Lori Lightfoot, thanks so much
for being with
us.
LORI LIGHTFOOT: Pleasure.
JOHN YANG: Your report really
pulled no punches.
It said at one point that the
community's
lack of trust in the Chicago
Police Department
is justified.
And we have seen that lack of
trust on full
public display. Was there
anything in what
you learned assembling this
report, anything
that surprised you?
LORI LIGHTFOOT: Well, I think
nothing specifically
surprised us, but the depth of
the anger and
the frustration across a wide
demographic
of folks, particularly within
the African-American
community, really resonated with
us.
So, I won't say surprises, but
it absolutely
struck at the core of much of
our thinking
and how we knew we needed to
move forward
with some of the bolder
recommendations that
made its way into the final
report.
(CROSSTALK)
JOHN YANG: Sorry. Go ahead.
LORI LIGHTFOOT: No, go ahead.
I was just going to say we heard
from a real
cross-section of folks, doctors,
lawyers,
professionals, average
working-day folks,
that were speaking of their
frustration, and
with real personal experience
about the way
that they have been treated by
the police.
JOHN YANG: At one point, the
report asked
how we got here, or how Chicago
and the Chicago
police got here.
And a lot of it seemed to go to
the attitudes
of the officers on the street.
You talked
about in part racism. You talked
about the
mentality of ends justifying the
means. A
lot of the recommendations in
this report
-- and there are many of them --
go to policy
changes, new procedures, new
offices.
How do you get at, though, the
attitudes of
the cops on the street?
LORI LIGHTFOOT: Well, look, I
want to make
-- be very clear that what we
were reflecting
is what we heard from the
community.
There are a number of police
officers out
there every day who do their job
the right
way. I hope that, if our
recommendations are
adopted, that it will actually
empower those
officers who want to truly serve
and protect,
who want to have the support and
resources
of their supervisors, of the
leadership of
the department, so that they can
police in
a way that is both effective and
respectful
and understands and reflects the
nature of
a true partnership with members
of the community.
And I think if we get to that
place, and if
the recommendations that we have
made actually
adopted, I actually think that
this will empower
police officers who are out
there struggling
and looking for leadership on a
number of
different issues, particularly
in the area
of training, in procedural
justice, in cultural
literacy.
There are a number of other
different things
that we found and that we
pointed out that
all go to engaging the community
in fighting
crime and addressing many of the
ills that
the police officers are called
upon to address
every single day.
JOHN YANG: We reached out to
Mayor Emanuel's
office today, and he said that
-- the office
told us that he's not going to
be speaking
on this for a while. He wants to
digest it
and read the report.
I understand that the task force
did meet
with the mayor yesterday when
you presented
the report. What did you take
away from that
meeting?
LORI LIGHTFOOT: Well, what we
took away is
that he's going to take his own
measure of
the very detailed findings that
we have made,
the specific recommendations.
This is a very dense document,
and we did
a very deep dive on a range of
different issues.
And, certainly, it was our
expectation that
he would take the time that he
needed to both
understand what we were saying,
what the recommendations
were, and then think about the
best path forward
for the city and for the
department.
JOHN YANG: What are you hearing
from the public
and from the police department
today?
LORI LIGHTFOOT: I think we're
hearing a range
of things.
People have a diversity of views
and reactions
to what is in the task force in
terms of its
finding and its recommendations.
I think we
stood up in an environment in
which there
was tremendous skepticism about
all forms
of government, and certainly
anything with
the current political structure.
People told us time after time
that they wish
us luck, but they didn't believe
it would
really make any difference. And,
frankly,
what we have heard from a lot of
folks that
engaged us with that level of
skepticism is
that they are pleasantly
surprised by the
way in which we addressed hard
truths that
reflected the things that have
been said in
many neighborhoods going back
decades and
that we presented a reasonable,
but bold and
aggressive path forward.
JOHN YANG: That skepticism,
everything -- all
the recommendations require
action either
by the mayor, the city council,
or the department
itself. There's a Justice
Department investigation.
What do you think is going to
happen? What
do you hope is going to happen?
LORI LIGHTFOOT: Well, what I
hope is going
to happen is that the feeling in
the community
that really cuts across the
entirety of Chicago,
that this is a moment for bold
action and
for change, my hope is that that
sentiment
in the community will help
inform, frankly,
the political stakeholders to
empower them
to do what is necessary to move
the department
forward.
The police department is one of
the most critical
and essential departments and
institutions
really in our city, as it is in
all large
urban areas. We need them to be
successful
in their mission, because there
are people
in crime-ravaged neighborhoods
who need the
police every single day.
And so creating a path forward,
speaking truth
as to what has happened at an
individual and
institutional level was
absolutely essential
for us to be able to move
forward. But there
is a path forward.
And we need to focus on how we
heal the rift
between the police department
and the communities
that it's sworn to serve and
protect.
JOHN YANG: Lori Lightfoot,
thanks for joining
us.
LORI LIGHTFOOT: My pleasure
to
be here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, first, it
couldn't get
any simpler. All the financial
advice you
really need can fit on a
four-by-six index
card.
And in the next eight minutes,
our economics
correspondent, Paul Solman, will
fill you
in and let you know what the
secret is. It's
part of our weekly Making Sense
report, which
airs every Thursday on the
"NewsHour."
WOMAN: Use Fidelity's analytics
to spot trends,
gain insights and figure out
what you want
to do next.
PAUL SOLMAN: On TV, financial
advice abounds.
But the best advice is: Ignore
it.
HAROLD POLLACK, Co-Author, "The
Index Card:
Why Personal Finance Doesn't
Have to Be Complicated":
Hey, Paul, come on in.
PAUL SOLMAN: So says University
of Chicago
health policy Professor Harold
Pollack, who
lives in Flossmoor, Illinois 20
miles from
campus.
About personal finance, until
recently, he
knew squat.
HAROLD POLLACK: I sort of
figured it would
all work out, and I didn't have
to think about
it too much. And so I didn't.
PAUL SOLMAN: Until, that is, he
had to, when,
in 2003, his mother-in-law died
suddenly,
leaving her disabled son in the
Pollacks'
hands.
HAROLD POLLACK: The expenses of
caring for
someone who is quite disabled,
you know, are
very frightening. When Vincent
moved into
our home, he was about 340
pounds, and we
needed to get furniture that
would fit him.
One time, we had to go out and
just buy a
recliner, and it was something
like $900.
PAUL SOLMAN: And there were
hospitalizations,
medical bills. Pollack needed
advice. So,
he started reading and had what
he calls an
epiphany.
HAROLD POLLACK: All the
financial experts
actually had a pretty simple set
of things
that they suggested that you do,
and basically
all of them would say tune out
all the other
stuff.
PAUL SOLMAN: Like the TV ads.
So, to be useful
to others, Pollack started
chronicling his
financial education in a blog,
and, in 2013,
interviewed financial self-help
writer Helaine
Olen over Skype.
At one point, he said,
off-handedly:
HAROLD POLLACK: The really good
advice is
a -- can fit on a three-by-five
index card
and is available for free in the
library.
PAUL SOLMAN: This time around,
Helaine Olen
joined virtually once again,
stuck at home
with the flu.
HELAINE OLEN, Co-Author, "The
Index Card:
Why Personal Finance Doesn't
Have to Be Complicated":
People began to write to Harold
and ask him
to do an index card.
PAUL SOLMAN: So Pollack put 10
items on an
index card, took a snapshot and
posted it
online. It promptly went viral,
touted on
The Washington Post's Wonkblog,
on Web sites
BoingBoing and Lifehacker.
And thus was born Pollack and
Olen's short
new book: "The Index Card," a
few simple rules.
HAROLD POLLACK: And that just
seemed much
more doable to a lot of people.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, what's on the
card? Rule
one: Strive to save 10 to 20
percent of your
income, which means slashing
your spending
on what you don't much care
about.
There are other things that I do
spend money
on. I go on vacations. I go to
things. Take
my wife to Bruce Springsteen, so
-- but I
try to spend my money on things
that I enjoy.
And I really just am apathetic
about my car,
so I shouldn't spend any money
on it.
PAUL SOLMAN: Though rule one is
easier advised
than accomplished, Helaine Olen
acknowledges.
HELAINE OLEN: I mean, how on
earth are you
supposed to save between 10 and
20 percent
of your income if you're making
$20,000 a
year? And the answer is, you
probably won't.
My position is that everybody is
helped, if
at all possible, to just even
get a little
bit of money aside.
PAUL SOLMAN: Rule two: Pay your
credit card
balance in full every month,
obvious, yet
less than a third of Americans
follow this
rule.
HAROLD POLLACK: One of the great
things that
you can do is try to pay cash
more often for
stuff.
PAUL SOLMAN: And if you must use
credit cards:
HAROLD POLLACK: Figure out the
one that has
the highest interest rate, and
stop using
that one, and pay off as much as
you can on
that credit card. Pay the
minimum on all your
other credit cards. Don't ever
avoid a credit
card payment.
PAUL SOLMAN: Three: Max out your
401(k) and
other tax-advantaged savings
accounts. To
this day, only 12 percent of
Americans do
this. When Pollack started
working, he wasn't
one of them.
HAROLD POLLACK: It's too much
trouble. It
was boring. It was -- you know,
it was something
that was really far off in the
future, and,
you know, the stock market was
like one-tenth
of what it is right now, and,
boy, I wish
I could have that back.
PAUL SOLMAN: Rule four: Never
buy or sell
individual stocks, because less
than 1 percent
of us have the ability to
consistently outperform
the market.
HAROLD POLLACK: It turns out
that the individual
people are not good at picking
winners and
losers in the stock market, and
financial
professionals aren't that great
at picking
winners and losers either.
PAUL SOLMAN: No matter what they
tell you.
JIM CRAMER, Host, "Mad Money":
Other people
want to make friends. I'm just
trying to make
you some money.
PAUL SOLMAN: According to
Pollack, a PBS show
from the '70s and '80s bears
some responsibility
for our faith in stock-picking.
LOUIS RUKEYSER, "Wall Street
Week": Good evening.
I'm Louis Rukeyser. This is
"Wall Street Week."
PAUL SOLMAN: The show returned
to TV on FOX
Business News last month.
HAROLD POLLACK: They were
pushing people away
from what they should be
thinking about, which
is I'm not going to be able to
pick which
stocks are good. I shouldn't
even try to do
that. And what I really care
about is what
the stock market is going to be
in 20 or 30
years, not what it's going to be
next year.
PAUL SOLMAN: Or next week or
tomorrow. So,
rule five: Buy inexpensive,
well-diversified
mutual funds and exchange traded
funds, index
funds, that is, and hold them.
HAROLD POLLACK: Many, many
people believe
that their financial adviser is
free
PAUL SOLMAN: Rule six is related
to five,
but it's more subtle: Insist
your investment
adviser, if you have one,
commits to a fiduciary
standard, putting the client
first, instead
of the suitability standard,
which requires
no such commitment.
To illustrate, Pollack posted a
video with
cakes.
WOMAN: Thanks for sharing your
cake, Jim.
It was suitable. From now on, I
will keep
my cake for myself. That's
fiduciary.
HAROLD POLLACK: If you put your
money into
sensible index funds and save
for your retirement,
and did everything properly, you
would end
up with this whole cake. If you
invested in
basically the same types of
investments, but
the sorts of things that people
recommend
on the suitability standard,
which have higher
fees, you would end up with less
cake. And
there'd be this slice missing,
which could
be significant.
PAUL SOLMAN: That missing slice
costs American
investors about $17 billion a
year in fees,
says Pollack. And just last
week, the Obama
administration proposed a new
rule that would
hold all investment advisers to
this higher
standard.
OK, let's zip through to the
end. Rule seven:
Buy a home only when you are
financially ready.
HAROLD POLLACK: You can stop
going to Starbucks.
You can buy a cheaper car the
next time around.
You can't do much about your
30-year mortgage.
You're kind of stuck with that.
So, it's important
that, in these big things, you
know, that
you are appropriately modest in
what you can
afford.
PAUL SOLMAN: Eight: Insurance.
Make sure you're
protected.
HAROLD POLLACK: Get the largest
deductible
that you can. You want your
insurance for
the $50,000 problem, not for the
$500 problem,
and you can save yourself a lot
of money if
you get a higher deductible on
your homeowners
and your auto insurance.
PAUL SOLMAN: Nine, the most
controversial
on the card: Do what you can to
support the
social safety net.
HAROLD POLLACK: To me, it's
incredibly important
to appreciate that we all have
to protect
each other against some of the
risks in life
that would just crush any one of
us if we
had to face it alone. And when
Vincent moved
into our house, we would have
absolutely been
bankrupted without Medicare, and
Medicaid,
and Social Security, and all the
programs
that helped our family.
PAUL SOLMAN: And finally, 10:
Remember the
index card.
HAROLD POLLACK: The idea is, you
have to be
methodical and stick to this,
and, you know,
the advice that we give is good,
but it's
the execution that's really
going to matter.
PAUL SOLMAN: For the "PBS
NewsHour," this
is Paul Solman, an economic
correspondent
for 39 years now, here to tell
you, if Harold
Pollack and Helaine Olen have it
wrong, I
have learned nothing over all
this time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A major health
announcement
in the U.S. today.
The Food and Drug Administration
said it will
permit one of the B vitamins,
folic acid,
to be added to corn masa flour,
used in making
tortillas and other favorites of
Hispanic
households, this to help prevent
neural tube
birth defects, such as spina
bifida.
Folic acid has been in fortify
wheat flour
since 1996, and is credited with
preventing
some 1,300 birth defects a year.
Health advocates
have long petitioned to include
it in corn
flour as well.
For more, Dr. Jose Cordero joins
us. He is
professor at the University of
Georgia, former
director of the National Center
on Birth Defects.
He is currently on the board of
the March
of Dimes, which is one of the
groups that
pressed for the change.
Dr. Cordero, thank you for being
with us.
What's your reaction to this
announcement?
DR. JOSE CORDERO, University of
Georgia: Well,
it was tremendous joy.
This is just a tremendous
occasion, that,
finally, after 10 years of
asking for having
folic acid included in corn masa
flour, finally,
it's here. And it is very
important, because,
right now, not only in Hispanic
households,
but we all in the country are
eating more
tortilla chips than we are
eating potato chips.
So, it is an important source of
having folic
acid that could help us prevent
some very
serious birth defects like spina
bifida.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What difference
do you think
it's going to make? Can you
quantify? We talked
about the number of birth
defects that have
been prevented because of adding
it to wheat
flour. What difference do you
think it's going
to make going forward?
DR. JOSE CORDERO: Well, the
difference it
is going to make, it is going to
reduce the
number of babies that are going
to be born
with spina bifida and
anencephaly to serious
neural tube defects.
And it is going to be maybe 40
or a year more,
but it could be even more. But
the important
thing is that we have known that
folic acid
can prevent these serious birth
defects. I
think we are at a point that
even one would
be too many.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Dr. Cordero, we
know that the
company that makes so much of
this corn flour
already fortifies corn flour
sold in Mexico.
But it is only now able to do it
in the United
States. How do you explain the
Food and Drug
Administration taking this long
to make it
-- to allow it to be fortified
here in the
U.S.?
DR. JOSE CORDERO: Well, it is
something that's
hard to explain, but the Food
and Drug Administration
follows some rules on how to
process and apply
even the citizens petition.
But I think that the good point
is finally
it is here, and no longer we
will have this
contrast, and I would say
disparity, where
you can get corn masa flour in
Mexico and
Venezuela and Costa Rica, but
not here.
And Gruma, the company that
makes these products,
it is -- was part of the group
and will be
getting this product into the
market very
soon.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, the Food
and Drug Administration
says the reason has to do with
needing evidence,
but, as you say, the evidence
has been there
for many years.
I think it's hard for people to
understand
why so many years have been
allowed to go
by, and why, presumably, you
know, women have
been allowed to give birth to
some babies
with these birth defects, and
this hasn't
taken place, and especially in
the Hispanic
community.
DR. JOSE CORDERO: Yes, that's
the case.
We have that among Hispanics.
The rate of
these serious defects is about
twice as high
as it is in African-Americans or
whites. So
there's been a disparity. And
the FDA was
asking for additional
information.
And thanks to March of Dimes, we
were able
to get the studies done,
demonstrate that
in fact the product will
continue to have
sufficient folic acid through
the shell life.
And I think that that's what
made the difference.
I'm so glad that we could move
forward and
celebrate that actually corn
masa flour, tortilla
chips, or your tortillas when
you go to a
Mexican restaurant will have
folic acid.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Dr. Jose Cordero,
now on the
board of the March of Dimes, we
thank you.
Today, Canadian Prime Minister
Justin Trudeau
introduced legislation to
legalize physician-assisted
suicide in that country.
Last year, the Canadian Supreme
Court overturned
a criminal ban against the
practice.
Tonight, we take a moment to
revisit a story
we brought you last year from
special correspondent
John Larson, who introduced us
to the patient
at the center of the court case.
ELAYNE SHAPRAY, Suffers From
Multiple Sclerosis:
My pain or discomfort is
virtually constant.
JOHN LARSON: When medically
assisted death
was argued before the Canadian
Supreme Court,
Elayne Shapray's statement was
exhibit A.
ELAYNE SHAPRAY: I cannot move or
turn over
in bed. In effect, I am a
prisoner of my own
body. I no longer consider my
life worth living
unless I possess the means to
leave it at
the time of my choosing.
JOHN LARSON: Shapray was a
nurse, an active
mother of two, until multiple
sclerosis struck.
Now 68 years old, she can no
longer do much
of anything without help,
including -- and
this is why she's exhibit A --
take her own
life.
How far away are you from that
point where
you would no longer be able to
end your own
life?
ELAYNE SHAPRAY: I can see it
from here.
JOHN LARSON: The question of
whether doctors
should be allowed to help people
like Elayne
die was at the center of the
Canadian Supreme
Court decision.
The court ruled that laws making
physician-assisted
death illegal violated
Canadians' constitutional
rights in cases where an adult
clearly consents
to the termination of life and
has a grievous
and irremediable medical
condition. The most
recent polls show 86 percent of
the Canadian
general public approve.
DAVID LEMON, Canada: There's no
question there's
going to have to be some serious
thought about
finding the right balance, but
it is something
whose time has come. It has to
be.
SUSAN WAGNER, Canada: I think
people do have
the right to decide for
themselves about the
end of their life, and how --
the quality
of that.
JOHN LARSON: The court's
decision left room
for interpretation, however. For
example,
a patient's condition must be,
among other
things, severe and incurable.
But that's not
the same as terminal. For
example, what if
a patient has severe arthritis?
Would they
be eligible? Or what if they're
disabled or
mentally ill?
Remember, Shapray suffers from
M.S., a debilitating,
but not life-ending disease.
You're not in the end stage of a
terminal
illness.
ELAYNE SHAPRAY: It's an
interminable illness.
JOHN LARSON: Interminable.
ELAYNE SHAPRAY: Interminable.
How do you weigh
that? How do you measure that,
unless you're
sitting in my wheelchair?
DR. WILL JOHNSTON, Euthanasia
Prevention Coalition:
Well, it seems clear from what
the Supreme
Court has said that you need not
be terminally
ill to qualify.
JOHN LARSON: Dr. Will Johnston,
an outspoken
opponent of physician-assisted
death, says
the court's liberal language,
that the patient
may suffer from an disease or
disability,
and that suffering is only
defined as intolerable
to the individual, leaves the
door open for
abuse.
DR. WILL JOHNSTON: You do not
even need to
be physically ill, because they
specifically
stated that psychological
suffering would
qualify as well.
GRACE PASTINE, British Columbia
Civil Liberties
Association: So what the court
said was that
the right to assisted dying
should be available
only in narrow circumstances.
JOHN LARSON: Grace Pastine of
the British
Columbia Civil Liberties
Association, which
successfully brought the case to
the Supreme
Court, says the specifics of
exactly who will
be eligible for assisted dying
have yet to
be determined, but should be
narrowly defined.
GRACE PASTINE: The court made it
very clear
that physician-assisted dying
would only be
an option for individuals who
are mentally
competent and able to make a
fully informed
voluntary choice. I think, for
example, someone
who suffered from a type of
severe mental
illness wouldn't be able to
qualify because
they wouldn't be able to meet
the consent
requirements.
JOHN LARSON: Opponents like Dr.
Johnston hope
pain management, palliative
care, will be
sufficient for most patients and
doctors.
DR. WILL JOHNSTON: We can do
that without
turning our 2,400 years of
medical ethical
history on its head, without
crossing that
bright line between attempting
to treat the
symptoms of the patient and
intending to kill
the patient.
LESLIE LAFOREST, Suffers From
Cancer: But
many, many people do not, in
fact, have that
painless death.
JOHN LARSON: Leslie Laforest was
diagnosed
three years ago with a
recurrence of her stage
four anal cancer. But although
her cancer
is in remission, she knows, if
it returns,
her death could be prolonged and
painful.
LESLIE LAFOREST: I have
absolutely the strongest
will that I will not go through
that final
chapter, whenever that comes.
JOHN LARSON: Laforest testified
in the case
that went to the Supreme Court
that current
law would force her to take her
life early,
while she could still do it
herself, a point
that the high court referenced
in its decision.
WOMAN: Here's your medicine,
Elayne.
JOHN LARSON: When the case went
to the Supreme
Court, lawyers requested Elayne
Shapray be
given special consideration, a
waiver that
would allow a doctor to end her
life while
the government writes a new law.
The court
turned her down, meaning Elayne
will have
to wait a full year before a
doctor could
legally end her life.
JOHN LARSON: You feel like you
have a year?
ELAYNE SHAPRAY: I think I would
rather not
answer that question.
JOHN LARSON: For "NewsHour,"
John Larson in
Vancouver, British Columbia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Elayne Shapray
continues her
fight against multiple sclerosis
and opposes
the proposed assisted-suicide
law. She says
it is not far-reaching enough.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, another
installment
in our Brief But Spectacular
series, where
we ask interesting people to
describe their
passions.
Tonight, we hear from actor and
writer Danny
Strong. He's written such films
as "The Butler,"
HBO's "Recount," "Game Change,"
and the popular
FOX TV series "Empire," which he
co-created.
Strong is about to direct a
feature film called
"Rebel in the Rye" starring
Kevin Spacey,
which he also wrote.
DANNY STRONG,
Actor/Writer/Director: I think
there's a common saying that to
write what
you know.
And I think that that is good
advice for an
amateur writer. But a
professional writer
should write what they're
passionate about.
When I was a full-time actor, my
entire existence
was based on waiting for my
agent to call.
I wrote a script for me to star
in as an actor,
which is a very common thing in
Hollywood,
and it was going to turn me into
the Sylvester
Stallone of my time. I was
convinced that
this was my "Rocky."
And I gave it to a few producer
friends. And
they read it, and they all said
the same thing:
"We really love this. Can we try
and get this
movie made without you
attached?"
I thought, no, this is my
"Rocky."
By the way, that film has still
never been
made, so probably not the best
decision.
And I had written several
scripts over several
years. And these scripts were
all really high-concept
comedies like "Liar Liar" or
"Bruce Almighty,"
because those were the movies
that were really
big hits at that time. Nobody
would buy them,
let alone make the movie.
And after five years of that, I
started to
get pretty despondent. I
realized that I was
writing movies that I would
never go see.
And I decided literally in that
moment that
I wasn't going to write another
script unless
it was a movie that I would
actually want
to go see.
And I went to go see this play
called "Stuff
Happens" about the buildup to
the Iraq War.
Seeing the audience respond to
this play,
I thought to myself, this is why
I went into
the arts in the first place. And
within 30
seconds of me making that
decision, the idea
of the Florida recount popped
into my head.
And, lo and behold, four months
later, I find
myself at HBO in the lobby ready
to go pitch
the president of HBO Films. And
I'm sitting
with my producer, Len Amato, and
I said to
him, "I can't believe that I
actually made
it here, that I'm actually in
the lobby of
HBO about to pitch this
project."
And he looked at me and he said,
"It's a better
story if you sell it."
Every script I have written,
"Recount," and
"Game Change," and "The Butler,"
and "Empire,"
all of those projects had
nothing to do with
my life. So, I have no insider
knowledge.
I have no professional
background.
They all have the same thing in
common, which
is, I'm really interested and
passionate about
the subject matter.
My name is Danny Strong and that
was by Brief
But Spectacular take on writing
what you don't
know.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can watch
more Brief
But Spectacular videos on our
Web site. That's
at PBS.org/NewsHour/brief.
Also online: We're in the midst
of a competition
to build the world's tallest
building, with
two towers expected in the
coming years that
will upstage Dubai's famous Burj
Khalifa,
but history suggests
differently. And that's
on our home page.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening with Mark Shields and
David Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.